# Python 3.x

- The `*` operator can be used with only two numeric values (for multiplication) or one string value and one integer value (for string replication).
- The input() function always returns a string (even if the user typed in a number).
- An integer can be equal to a floating point.
  Eg:

  ```
  	>>> 42 == '42'
  	False
  	>>> 42 == 42.0
  	True
  	>>> 42.0 == 0042.000
  	True
  ```

- The == and != operators can actually work with values of any data type.
- The <, >, <=, and >= operators, on the other hand, work properly only with integer and floating-point values.
- When used in conditions, 0, 0.0, and '' (the empty string) are considered False, while all other values are considered True.

- `random` module:

  ```
  	# It will give random integer value between fromVal & toVal (including fromVal and toVal)
  	random.randint(fromVal, toVal)
  ```

- Can cause the program to terminate, or exit, by calling the `sys.exit()` function.
  Eg:

  ```
  	import sys
  	sys.exit()
  ```

- In Python there is a value called `None`, which represents the absence of a value. `None` is the only value of the `NoneType` data type.
- `print()` function returns `None`.

**Note**: Behind the scenes, Python adds return `None` to the end of any function definition with no return statement. This is similar to how a while or for loop implicitly ends with a continue statement. Also, if you use a return statement without a value (that is, just the return keyword by itself), then None is returned.

## Keyword Arguments and print() :

- Keyword arguments are identified by the keyword put before them in the function call. Keyword arguments are often used for optional parameters.
- `print()` function has the optional parameters end and sep to specify what should be printed at the end of its arguments and between its arguments (separating them), respectively.
  Eg:

  ```
  	print('hello', end='')
  	print('world')
  ```

- When you pass multiple string values to print(), the function will automatically separate them with a single space.

  Eg-1:

  ```
  	>>> print('cats', 'dogs', 'mice')
  	cats dogs mice
  ```

  Eg-2:

  ```
  	>>> print('cats', 'dogs', 'mice', sep=',')
  	cats,dogs,mice
  ```

---

- If you need to modify a global variable from within a function, use the "global" statement.

  Eg:

  ```
  	eggs = 30

  	def spam():
  		global eggs
  		print(eggs)
  		eggs = 40

  	spam()
  	print(eggs)
  ```

## Exception Handling:

Eg:

```
	def spam(divideBy):
		try:
			return 42 / divideBy
		except ZeroDivisionError:
			print('Error: Invalid argument.')

	print(spam(2))
	print(spam(12))
	print(spam(0))
	print(spam(1))
```
