# Reading and Writing Files

Folder names and filenames are not case sensitive on Windows and OS X, they are case sensitive on Linux.

## Backslash on Windows and Forward Slash on OS X and Linux path

1. path separator in windows: \
2. path separator in X, Linux: /

- To handle both of the above cases we have `os.path.join()` function.
- If you pass it the string values of individual file and folder names in your path, `os.path.join()` will return a string with a file path using the correct path separators.

Eg: O/P for windows

```
>>> import os
>>> os.path.join('usr', 'bin', 'spam')
'usr\\bin\\spam'
```

**Note**: (Notice that the backslashes are doubled because each backslash needs to be escaped by another backslash character.) If I had called this function on OS X or Linux, the string would have been 'usr/bin/spam'.

## The Current Working Directory

- You can get the current working directory as a string value with the `os.getcwd()` function and change it with `os.chdir()`.

Eg:

```
>>> import os
>>> os.getcwd()
'C:\\Python34'
>>> os.chdir('C:\\Windows\\System32')
>>> os.getcwd()
'C:\\Windows\\System32'
```

- Python will display an error(`FileNotFoundError`) if you try to change to a directory that does not exist.

## Absolute vs. Relative Paths

1. `Absolute path`: which always begins with the root folder
2. `Relative path`: which is relative to the program’s current working directory

- A single period (“dot”) for a folder name is shorthand for “this directory.” Two periods (“dot-dot”) means “the parent folder.”

**Note**: The `.\` at the start of a relative path is optional. For example, `.\spam.txt` and `spam.txt` refer to the same file.

## Creating New Folders with os.makedirs()

Eg:

```
>>> import os
>>> os.makedirs('C:\\delicious\\walnut\\waffles')
```

## The os.path Module:

Eg: os.path.join(), etc.

- The full documentation for the os.path module is on the Python website at http://docs.python.org/3/library/os.path.html

### Handling Absolute and Relative Paths

- `os.path.abspath(relativePath)`: will return a string of the absolute path of the argument.
- `os.path.isabs(path)`: will return True if the argument is an absolute path and False if it is a relative path.
- `os.path.relpath(path, start)`: will return a string of a relative path from the start path to path. If start is not provided, the current working directory is used as the start path.

Eg-1:

```
>>> os.path.abspath('.')
'C:\\Python34'
>>> os.path.abspath('.\\Scripts')
'C:\\Python34\\Scripts'
>>> os.path.isabs('.')
False
>>> os.path.isabs(os.path.abspath('.'))
True
```

Eg-2:

```
>>> os.path.relpath('C:\\Windows', 'C:\\')
'Windows'
>>> os.path.relpath('C:\\Windows', 'C:\\spam\\eggs')
'..\\..\\Windows'
>>> os.getcwd()
'C:\\Python34'
```

- `os.path.dirname(path)`: will return a string of everything that comes before the last slash in the path argument.
- `os.path.basename(path)`: will return a string of everything that comes after the last slash in the path argument.

Eg:

```
>>> path = 'C:\\Windows\\System32\\calc.exe'
>>> os.path.basename(path)
'calc.exe'
>>> os.path.dirname(path)
'C:\\Windows\\System32'
```

- `os.path.split(calcFilePath)`: returns tuple value with path’s dir name and base name together.

Eg:

```
>>> calcFilePath = 'C:\\Windows\\System32\\calc.exe'
>>> os.path.split(calcFilePath)
('C:\\Windows\\System32', 'calc.exe')
```

- Take a file path and return a list of strings of each folder:
  Eg:

```
>>> calcFilePath.split(os.path.sep)
['C:', 'Windows', 'System32', 'calc.exe']
```

- On OS X and Linux systems, there will be a blank string at the start of the returned list:
  Eg:

```
>>> '/usr/bin'.split(os.path.sep)
['', 'usr', 'bin']
```

### Finding File Sizes and Folder Contents

- `os.path.getsize(path)` : returns the size in bytes of the file in the path argument.
- `os.listdir(path)` : returns a list of filename strings for each file in the path argument. (Note that this function is in the os module, not os.path.)

Eg:

```
>>> os.path.getsize('C:\\Windows\\System32\\calc.exe')
>>> 776192
>>> os.listdir('C:\\Windows\\System32')
>>> ['0409', '12520437.cpx', '12520850.cpx', '5U877.ax', 'aaclient.dll',
>>> --snip--
>>> 'xwtpdui.dll', 'xwtpw32.dll', 'zh-CN', 'zh-HK', 'zh-TW', 'zipfldr.dll']
```

- To find the total size of all the files in this directory, We can use os.path.getsize() and os.listdir() together.

Eg:

```
>>> totalSize = 0
>>> for filename in os.listdir('C:\\Windows\\System32'):
      totalSize = totalSize + os.path.getsize(os.path.join('C:\\Windows\\System32', filename))

>>> print(totalSize)
1117846456
```

### Checking Path Validity

- `os.path.exists(path)` : returns True if the file or folder referred to in the argument exists and will return False if it does not exist.
- `os.path.isfile(path)` : returns True if the path argument exists and is a file and will return False otherwise.

- `os.path.isdir(path)` : returns True if the path argument exists and is a folder and will return False otherwise.

Eg:

```
>>> os.path.exists('C:\\Windows')
True
>>> os.path.exists('C:\\some_made_up_folder')
False
>>> os.path.isdir('C:\\Windows\\System32')
True
>>> os.path.isfile('C:\\Windows\\System32')
False
>>> os.path.isdir('C:\\Windows\\System32\\calc.exe')
False
>>> os.path.isfile('C:\\Windows\\System32\\calc.exe')
True
```

- You can determine whether there is a DVD or flash drive currently attached to the computer by checking for it with the os.path.exists() function.

Eg:

```
>>> os.path.exists('D:\\')
False
```

## The File Reading/Writing Process

- The functions covered in the next few sections will apply to plaintext files.
- There are three steps to reading or writing files in Python
  - Call the `open()` function to return a File object.
  - Call the `read()` or `write()` method on the File object.
  - Close the file by calling the `close()` method on the File object.

### Opening Files with the open() Function

Eg: will open the file in “reading plaintext” mode, or read mode for short.

```
>>> helloFile = open('C:\\Users\\your_home_folder\\hello.txt')
```

**Note**: Path can be absolute or relative.

- open('/Users/asweigart/ hello.txt', 'r') and open('/Users/asweigart/hello.txt') do the same thing.
- The call to `open()` returns a File object.

### Reading the Contents of Files

- To read the entire contents of a file as a string value, use the File object’s `read()` method.

Eg:

```
>>> helloContent = helloFile.read()
>>> helloContent
'Hello world!'
```

- use the `readlines()` method to get a list of string values from the file, one string for each line of text.
- Make sure to separate the lines with line breaks in the text file.

Eg:

```
>>> sonnetFile = open('sonnet29.txt')
>>> sonnetFile.readlines()
[When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,\n', ' I all alone beweep my
outcast state,\n', And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,\n', And
look upon myself and curse my fate,']
```

### Writing to Files

- open file in write mode or append mode for short.
- Write mode ('`w`') will overwrite the existing file and start from scratch.
- Append mode ('`a`') will append text to the end of the existing file.
- If the filename passed to open() does not exist, both write and append mode will create a new, blank file. After reading or writing a file, call the `close()` method before opening the file again.

Eg:

```
>>> baconFile = open('bacon.txt', 'w')
>>> baconFile.write('Hello world!\n')
13                                                # Returns the number of characters written, including the newline.
>>> baconFile.close()
>>> baconFile = open('bacon.txt', 'a')
>>> baconFile.write('Bacon is not a vegetable.')
25
>>> baconFile.close()
>>> baconFile = open('bacon.txt')
>>> content = baconFile.read()
>>> baconFile.close()
>>> print(content)
Hello world!
Bacon is not a vegetable.
```

## Saving Variables with the shelve Module

- You can save variables in your Python programs to binary shelf files using the shelve module.
- stores data like dictionary.
- creates `.db` file.

Eg-1: open and write

```
>>> import shelve
>>> shelfFile = shelve.open('mydata')
>>> cats = ['Zophie', 'Pooka', 'Simon']
>>> shelfFile['cats'] = cats
>>> shelfFile.close()
```

**Note**: Shelf values don’t have to be opened in read or write mode—they can do both once opened.

Eg-2:

```
>>> shelfFile = shelve.open('mydata')
>>> type(shelfFile)
<class 'shelve.DbfilenameShelf'>
>>> shelfFile['cats']
['Zophie', 'Pooka', 'Simon']
>>> shelfFile.close()
```

- Just like dictionaries, shelf values have keys() and values() methods that will return list-like values of the keys and values in the shelf. Since these methods return list-like values instead of true lists, you should pass them to the list() function to get them in list form.

Eg:

```
>>> shelfFile = shelve.open('mydata')
>>> list(shelfFile.keys())
['cats']
>>> list(shelfFile.values())
[['Zophie', 'Pooka', 'Simon']]
>>> shelfFile.close()
```

**Note**: Plaintext is useful for creating files that you’ll read in a text editor such as Notepad or TextEdit, but if you want to save data from your Python programs, use the shelve module.

## Saving Variables with the pprint.pformat() Function

- `pprint.pprint()` : “pretty print” the contents of a list or dictionary.
- `pprint.pformat()` : return this same text as a string instead of printing it.

- Not only is this string formatted to be easy to read, but it is also syntactically correct Python code. So we can write this string to .py file. This file will be your very own module that you can import whenever you want to use the variable stored in it. (Say you have a dictionary stored in a variable and you want to save this variable and its contents for future use.)

Eg:

```
>>> import pprint
>>> cats = [{'name': 'Zophie', 'desc': 'chubby'}, {'name': 'Pooka', 'desc': 'fluffy'}]
>>> pprint.pformat(cats)
"[{'desc': 'chubby', 'name': 'Zophie'}, {'desc': 'fluffy', 'name': 'Pooka'}]"
>>> fileObj = open('myCats.py', 'w')
>>> fileObj.write('cats = ' + pprint.pformat(cats) + '\n')
83
>>> fileObj.close()
```

- You can then import these files into scripts.

Eg:

```
>>> import myCats
>>> myCats.cats
[{'name': 'Zophie', 'desc': 'chubby'}, {'name': 'Pooka', 'desc': 'fluffy'}]
>>> myCats.cats[0]
{'name': 'Zophie', 'desc': 'chubby'}
>>> myCats.cats[0]['name']
'Zophie'
```

**Note**: File objects, for example, cannot be encoded as text. So shelve variable will be better.
